#1 Introduction 

---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


![](media/image1.png)![](media/image2.png)

<span id="GoBack" class="anchor"></span>

COLOPHON

<span id="_TOCRange" class="anchor"></span>

ABOUT 4

WHO WE ARE 5

APPLIED RESEARCH 5

AMSTERDAM CREATIVE INDUSTRIES NETWORK 5

CREATE-IT 5

WHO OUR STUDENTS ARE 5

WHO OUR PARTNERS ARE 6

WHAT WE DO 6

PROGRAMME 8

DESIGN PROCESS 9

RESEARCH, TRANSLATE AND CREATE 9

SCRUM 9

SPRINTS 10

RITUALS 10

INTERESTING READS /\
RESOURCES 13

PREPARATION 14

HYBRID PUBLISHING WORKFLOW 14

UX PRINCIPLES 15

CODE 15

STUDIO 17

MULTIDISCIPLINARY AND MULTICULTURAL TEAMWORK 18

LANGUAGE 18

COMMUNICATION STYLES 18

HIERARCHY 18

CONFLICT 19

PRESENTING YOUR WORK 19

BLOG 19

SHARING, WORKING AND DOCUMENTATION 19

RULES OF THUMB 20

<span id="_Toc" class="anchor"></span>ABOUT

<span id="_Toc1" class="anchor"></span>WHO WE ARE

The world of digital publishing has been growing steadily for several
years. The arrival of tablets and smartphones has accelerated the
developments, and today it is impossible to imagine a media landscape
without e-books, newspaper apps, and digital magazines. Digitalization
is turning the field upside down! The PublishingLab is a ‘hybrid
publisher’ working at the intersection of publishing and digital
technology, both in print and digitally.

<span id="_Toc2" class="anchor"></span>APPLIED RESEARCH

PublishingLab conducts applied research by doing innovative experiments
in de field of (digital) publishing. This can be research on the impact
of developments on the branch as a whole, conducting small experiment in
the field of EPUB3 such as research/work on user interfaces for
collaborative online editing environments, research/work on conveying
hybrid publishing concepts and workflows to a non-expert audience or
just looking into interesting design problems to tackle.

<span id="_Toc3" class="anchor"></span>AMSTERDAM CREATIVE INDUSTRIES
NETWORK

The PublishingLab is part of the Amsterdam Creative Industries Network.
The Amsterdam Creative Industries Network (ACIN) is the Dutch national
talent, knowledge and business network for creative industry and digital
technology. ACIN was founded by the Amsterdam University of Applied
Sciences, the Amsterdam School of the Arts and Inholland University of
Applied Sciences.

<span id="_Toc4" class="anchor"></span>CREATE-IT

Publishing is based in Create-IT, the knowledge center of the School of
Design & Communication from the Amsterdam University of Applied
Sciences. Students, teachers and researchers work together on applied
research with the creative industries and the ICT sector. The results
will be used in curriculum development and for consulting the industry.
Together with the Institute of Network Cultures, PublishingLab is
located in the center of the Amstel Campus Amsterdam.

<span id="_Toc5" class="anchor"></span>WHO OUR STUDENTS ARE

PublishingLab works with mainly final year students from different
backgrounds, and offers a multitude of opportunities to its students.
We’re looking for people who are ready to respond to opportunities and
challenges intelligently, creatively and enthusiastically; people who
are motivated, have ambitions in life, love to explore what’s happening
around them, and have specific skills and talents. We like to work with
students who don’t give up easily, and who love experimenting with text,
typography, code, (moving) images and the opportunities that digital
media provide.

PublishingLab students most of all work in multidisciplinary teams
guided by experts from the industry and the Amsterdam University of
Applied Sciences. Where possible the team consists of a mix of a
(graphic) designer, interaction designer, programmer, researcher and a
publisher. In a period from 3 till 6 months you conduct research and
deliver a paper or develop a working prototype in close collaboration
with the stakeholder and the PublishingLab. Preferably you work four
days at the PublishingLab (other variants are also possible). Team
members work five days a week either at Studio HvA, the client’s office
or in the field (the latter terms are negotiable).

<span id="_Toc6" class="anchor"></span>WHO OUR PARTNERS ARE

PublishingLab is interested in working with new partners, because great
relationships with committed project partners are crucial to the depth
of our students’ learning and to the development of new knowledge and
design in the hybrid publishing process.

PublishingLab works with various assigners from government, Dutch SMEs,
and large international corporations in the field digital media and
publishing, as well as various other domains.

Our projects are always shaped in co-creation with our partners. During
the projects the PublishingLab brings in a network of Amsterdam’s
creative industries. Recent partners have included Persgroep Nederland,
UNStudio, Canon, Hogeschool Bibliotheek Amsterdam, Het Vlaams-Nederlands
platform Laboratorium Actuele Kunstkritiek, Domein voor Kunstkritiek,
Rekto: Verso, Archined, PIet Zwart Institute and many others.

<span id="_Toc7" class="anchor"></span>WHAT WE DO

The world of digital publishing has been growing steadily for several
years. The arrival of tablets and smartphones has accelerated the
developments, and today it is impossible to imagine a media landscape
without e-books, newspaper apps, and digital magazines. Digitalization
is turning the field upside down! The PublishingLab is a ‘hybrid
publisher’ working at the intersection of publishing and digital
technology, both in print and digitally.

The entire publishing chain is influenced by these developments:
technology is changing the creation, production, distribution, marketing
and end use of publications. The PublishingLab researches into the
impact this will have on the branch as a whole.

PublishingLab activities are directed towards the following three
groups:

1          makers (authors, designers);

2          intermediaries (publishers);

3          end users (readers / students).

The PublishingLab conducts applied research by doing innovative
experiments in the field of (digital) publishing. This can be research
on the impact of developments on the branch as a whole, conducting small
experiments in the field of EPUB3 such as research/work on user
interfaces for collaborative online editing environments, research/work
on conveying hybrid publishing concepts and workflows to a non-expert
audience or just looking into interesting design problems to tackle.

<span id="_Toc8" class="anchor"></span>PROGRAMME

<span id="_Toc9" class="anchor"></span>DESIGN PROCESS

One of the methods we use, is the the MediaLAB Amsterdam design
process[^1], which is a problem-solving method that helps create and
evaluate solutions in response to challenges. In this process one tries
to evoke real curiosity in order to make teams feel highly motivated to
find answers and solutions. This involves lots of iterations, making,
prototyping, going out on field studies and testing each idea, concept
or prototype with actual users.

<span id="_Toc10" class="anchor"></span>RESEARCH, TRANSLATE AND CREATE

At the start of every design challenge, and afterwards, at the start of
each new stage in the design process, research has a central role.
Research provides plenty of insights; how people act/think/feel and who
the intended users are, within the context of the challenge.

![](media/image3.png)Figure 1. MediaLAB Amsterdam Design Process,
Research, Translate and Create phase (source Manual MediaLAB Design
Process 2014).

These insights are the key to a solution, but they have to be translated
into actual design requirements: which are key for the optimal solution?
This is something that can be decided on the basis of research, and
implemented and tested by creating a prototype. A next step might be to
research again into what you created by setting up a test with users.
During the project there is a constant two-way flow: from research,
translation to creation, and from creation, translation to research.

<span id="_Toc11" class="anchor"></span>SCRUM

Scrum is an iterative and incremental process for the design and
development of products and services, and it has a very specific way of
organizing a team. Tasks are achieved faster and with higher quality
when using the Scrum Framework. This is possible because of the high
self-motivation of the team, which chooses itself how tasks will be
executed. The project partner’s demands are iteratively prioritized and
quickly actualized. The flow of the design process is embedded in a
sprint-based schedule, ideally supported by Scrum roles, rituals,
sessions and artifacts that support the process.

<span id="_Toc12" class="anchor"></span>SPRINTS

A ‘sprint’ (or iteration) is the basic unit of develop-ment. The sprint
is a ’timeboxed’ effort; that is, it is restricted to a specific
duration. The sprints in the PublishingLab have an average duration of
three weeks. However, teams are free to fit and perform more sprints
within those scheduled three weeks.

<span id="_Toc13" class="anchor"></span>RITUALS

Specific ‘rituals’ during each sprint are being used. Each sprint starts
with an ideation and planning session, has a mid-sprint translation /
transfer session, and ends with a sprint review meeting and
retrospective. During a sprint, the team has daily stand-up meetings.

Figure 2. ![](media/image4.png)MediaLAB Amsterdam Design Process (source
Manual MediaLAB Design Process 2014).

1 — DAILY STAND-UP MEETINGS

The daily stand-up meeting takes place at the same time and place of
every working day. The daily scrum meeting is held in the morning, as it
helps set the context for the coming day’s work. These scrum meetings
are strictly time-boxed to 15 minutes. This keeps the discussion brisk
but relevant.

The daily stand-up meeting is not used as a problem-solving or issue
resolution meeting. Issues raised are taken offline and usually dealt
with immediately after the meeting. During the daily scrum, each team
member answers the following three questions:

a\) - What did you do yesterday?\
b) - What will you do today?\
c) - Are there any impediments in your way?

2 — IDEATION AND PLANNING

Every sprint has a ‘ideation and planning’ session. In this session the
creative process is triggered by the facilitation of a brainstorm and
ideation session in which ideas are identified and quickly sketched.

The most promising ideas are placed in a hierarchy and it is decided
which have potential to be taken along in the sprint. After this, tasks
are identified, but more importantly the exact sprint goal (and
duration) is defined.

It is important to have a very clear goal, so that the team can break
the effort down into smaller-sized pieces that contribute to achieving
that goal more smoothly,

3 — TRANSLATE AND TRANSFER

In the middle of the 3-week sprint there is a scheduled ‘translate and
transfer’ session in which your team and the project-related researchers
come together to translate research insights and decide which things to
act on in this sprint or the next (transfer).

4 — SPRINT REVIEW

After the team has completed the planned deliverables for this sprint it
is time for the ‘sprint review’. In this meeting, which is organized
with all stakeholders present, decisions on progress and how to proceed
are made, including next steps and possible needs and wishes.
Specifically, the team will present the work they did during the sprint
and will run through the sprint backlog together with stakeholders.

5 — SPRINT RETROSPECTIVE

A ‘sprint retrospective’ is held at the very end of each sprint. This is
a meeting to reflect on both the results and the processes with the
team. It is meant to change, improve, or stick to the way they work and
function as a team.

<span id="_Toc14" class="anchor"></span>INTERESTING READS /\
RESOURCES

<span id="_Toc15" class="anchor"></span>PREPARATION

In order to prepare yourself and get you up to speed in the digital
publishing area we have some recommendations for reading and coding.

<span id="_Toc16" class="anchor"></span>HYBRID PUBLISHING WORKFLOW

Everything has a user experience. The goal of a UX designer is to make
users effective. UX design involves a process that is very similar to
doing science. Firstly doing research to understand the user, develop
ideas to solve the users’ needs, and thereafter build and measure the
solutions created in the real world.

— REQUIRED![](media/image5.png)

*From Print to Ebooks: a Hybrid Publishing Toolkit for the Arts*

**About this publication: **This Toolkit is meant for everyone working
in art and design publishing. No specific expertise of digital
technology, or indeed traditional publishing technology, is required.
The Toolkit provides hands-on practical advice and tools, focusing on
working solutions for low-budget, small-edition publishing. Everything
in the Hybrid Publishing Toolkit is based on real-world projects with
art and design publishers. Editorial scenarios include art and design
catalogues and periodicals, research publications, and
artists’/designer’s books.\
**About the authors: **Digital Publishing Toolkit Collective, consists
of: Marc de Bruijn, Liz Castro, Florian Cramer, Joost Kircz, Silvio
Lorusso, Michael Murtaugh, Pia Pol, Miriam Rasch and Margreet Riphagen\
*http://www.publishinglab.nl/blog/publication/from-print-to-ebooks-a-hybrid-publishing-toolkit-for-the-arts/*

PublishingLab blogroll (the last 6 blogposts) -
*http://www.publishinglab.nl/blog/*

— OPTIONAL![](media/image1.jpeg)

*Digital Publishing Toolkit: The Blog Posts*

**About this publication:** This publication contains the findings
obtained in a two years research and have been documented on the blog
*http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing*. Digital Publishing
Toolkit: the Blog Posts collects all these blog posts. This EPUB
consists of texts, images and links to video files. The videos
themselves have been omitted, to prevent the EPUB file from being too
memory intensive to load on some reading devices. It includes
reflections, reports and tools. The blog posts are arranged in reverse
chronological order, with the exception of the earliest post, as we
thought it would be most appropriate to begin the collection with the
original first post.

**About the authors:** Digital Publishing Toolkit Collective, consists
of: Marc de Bruijn, Liz Castro, Florian Cramer, Joost Kircz, Silvio
Lorusso, Michael Murtaugh, Pia Pol, Miriam Rasch and Margreet Riphagen
and guest bloggers.\
*http://www.publishinglab.nl/blog/publication/digital-publishing-toolkit-the-blog-posts/*

<span id="_Toc17" class="anchor"></span>UX PRINCIPLES

Everything has a user experience. The goal of a UX designer is to make
users effective. UX design involves a process that is very similar to
doing science. Firstly doing research to understand the user, develop
ideas to solve the users’ needs, and thereafter build and measure the
solutions created in the real world.

— REQUIRED

iOS Human Interface Guidelines -
*https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/UserExperience/Conceptual/MobileHIG/LayoutandAppearance.html*

Why you're overthinking your UI/UX - *https://youtu.be/Is2O666qDPs*

— OPTIONAL

How to become a UX designer - *https://youtu.be/CexVeagtk2Y*

Paper prototyping -
*http://www.userfocus.co.uk/articles/paperprototyping.html*

Adaptive (ebook) layout - http://sorotokin.com/adaptive-layout/

— REFERENCE\
UX design reference - http://www.nngroup.com

<span id="_Toc18" class="anchor"></span>CODE

Coding is something you learn by doing. We don’t expect you to become a
coder if you are a designer, but some basics understanding of HTML and
CSS is nice to have.

— REQUIRED

codeacademy HTML & CSS - *http://www.codecademy.com/tracks/web*

Grids for the web -
*http://www.slideshare.net/huer1278ft/grids-are-good-right*

CSS glossary - *http://www.codecademy.com/glossary/css*

— OPTIONAL

Positioning - *https://css-tricks.com/all-about-floats/*

Positioning -
*https://css-tricks.com/absolute-positioning-inside-relative-positioning/*

Positioning -
*http://www.barelyfitz.com/screencast/html-training/css/positioning/*

Transitions & Animations -
*http://css3.bradshawenterprises.com/transitions/*

Transitions & Animations -\
*http://www.kirupa.com/html5/css3\_animations\_vs\_transitions.htm*

— REFERENCE\
CSS reference -
*https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference*

<span id="_Toc19" class="anchor"></span>STUDIO

<span id="_Toc20" class="anchor"></span>MULTIDISCIPLINARY AND
MULTICULTURAL TEAMWORK

At PublishingLab you work in a team comprising people with different
skill sets and from different educational and cultural backgrounds. Even
local cultural differences between people from the same country can have
a big impact on the way they work with each other. Working in a team
with a varied composition therefore requires a special attitude, both
professionally and socially. Here are some things you should take into
account.

<span id="_Toc21" class="anchor"></span>LANGUAGE

Multidisciplinary and intercultural teams are great for creative
processes. However, when people who work together have different
languages, this can be an obstacle to success. Speaking in your mother
tongue is very different from speaking in a second or third language. So
please consider your words carefully; there are issues of
interpretation, but also of cultural differences, especially when the
spoken language is not the first language for either of you. Use
visuals, write down your ideas, sketch. Make sure you under- standing
each other.

<span id="_Toc22" class="anchor"></span>COMMUNICATION STYLES

Methods of communication that are normal for one group of people may
appear ineffective or inappropriate to another group. A person from a
culture in which loud voices and interruptions are not seen as
aggressive may intimidate someone from a culture that teaches more
reserved modes of expression. Learning in advance about the cultures of
your team members before you work on a team with them can help you
understand their methods of communication.

<span id="_Toc23" class="anchor"></span>HIERARCHY

The importance of authority varies greatly between cultures. Some groups
give great respect to people in positions of authority, while people
from other cultures are perfectly willing to question an authority
figure if they see them doing something wrong. Authority is based on
different criteria in different cultures. The nature of a team should be
made clear to all participants at its inception. At the beginning of the
semester you will therefore write a team ‘plan’ in which ways of working
together, but also values and roles are written down and agreed on.

<span id="_Toc24" class="anchor"></span>CONFLICT

When conflict does occur within a team, members from different
backgrounds may react to it in dramatically different ways. Some people
will repress their reactions to an insult or slight, while others will
fight back. These reactions are based on individual personality to some
extent but are also conditioned by a person’s background.

Resolving conflict between team members effectively requires an
understanding of everyone’s view of what caused the conflict. Being
open, but respectful to each other’s background, is the best remedy for
conflict resolution.

<span id="_Toc25" class="anchor"></span>PRESENTING YOUR WORK

At the end of the design process you will have the opportunity to share
with the world what you have created. We use the website as a
communication portal for all our projects, but you will also have the
opportunity to present your results to the creative industry during a
final event. This will be the showcase of your final design and
prototype. You will present yourselves as experts to an audience
consisting of friends, family, and partners from the creative
industries, but also creative agencies looking for the latest trends and
scouting for talent.

<span id="_Toc26" class="anchor"></span>BLOG

One of MediaLAB Amsterdam’s most important communication channels is its
blog. Here, project teams keep followers and friends updated on the
latest developments and insights in their projects or in related fields.
As a team we trust you are just as proud as we are of our work, and just
as keen to share its news on a regular basis. In the first week you will
learn how our blog works and how you can best communicate and promote
your team’s work there.

<span id="_Toc27" class="anchor"></span>SHARING, WORKING AND
DOCUMENTATION

To work together efficiently you’ll need tools to collaborate on
projects, share documents and calendars, and communicate. There are huge
numbers of digital tools to help you with this: use them! The right
tools will put the most relevant information within easy reach.

<span id="_Toc28" class="anchor"></span>RULES OF THUMB

No ambitious programme would be achievable without some good old rules
of thumb about things you can do, or should do (act); things to
remember; and things to respect. We expect you to take note of these and
commit them to memory. We are open to initiatives, so if you have
anything to add or suggest (a change), please do not hesitate to talk to
someone from the PublishingLab team and your team members. We’ll find a
way to make everybody happy.

— ACT

1 — Every team works and studies for five days a week from 9:00 until
17:30 (if otherwise agreed with the coach).

2 — Schedule when you will spend time on individual research, your own
graduation project, or your personal development plan

3 — Appreciate the value of the structured morning-scrum setup; it is
there to help you and your team aim for the highest level of quality

4 — Finish things on time, as agreed upon with your team in your
meetings

— REMEMBER

1 — Involve or CC your Publishing expert coach in communications with
the project partner. In case of a meeting, inform them in time about the
details. The expert will always want to be present at partner meetings

2 — You can request a day off with your PM. Of course you will have to
inform your team too. One-day requests: a week in advance. More than one
day? At least 3 weeks in advance. Be aware that your requests may or may
not be granted, depending on project needs.

3 — The PublishingLab team is not responsible for your personal grades
(except for international students).

— RESPECT

1 — Keep to the team agreement document that you filled in at the start
of the process

2 — In the event of illness, please contact your expert coach before
9:30

3 — Keep the PublishingLab Studio tidy, shiny and awesome!

4 — Scheduled workshops are obligatory. There are no exceptions, as
these are a vital part of the programme. If you arrive late, the doors
will stay closed

5 — Some distraction is good, but don’t over-do social media,
appointments with others during working hours, etc. Keep the work/fun
ratio balanced

6 — You are not alone, and your team members will need to feel the same
dedication coming from you as they are putting in themselves. Keep the
same energy level and the motor will run beautifully!

[^1]: MediaLAB Design Method toolkit,
    http://medialabamsterdam.com/toolkit/






//////////////





<div class="summary"> 
- Hybrid print and electronic publishing requires new work methods and workflows. 
- Low-budget, small-edition, visually-oriented publications that are designed in-house will require more significant changes in work methods than big-budget publications for which the ebook design can be outsourced. 
- Interactive multimedia is still difficult to realize in books. Yet there are new opportunities for entirely new publication formats (such as books with customized content and micro-books). 
- This Toolkit focuses on low-budget, hybrid print and electronic books designed in-house using standard software and Open Source tools. 
</div> 


'You must change your life' - borrowing from the philosopher Peter Sloterdijk, this could be the summary of our message to art-oriented and design-oriented publishers, writers, editors and designers who are currently transitioning from traditional book making to electronic publishing or - more typically - **hybrid publishing** of print and electronic formats. Hybrid publishing will sooner or later confront them with the need to re-think traditional publication formats, editorial and production workflows, and distribution. The changes required may well be greater and more extensive than initially expected! 

*Change will be minor for scientific publishers and large publishers* 

Having said that, there are exceptions. Workflow changes can be also minor for publishers who already do all their editorial work in highly structured digital document formats such as **XML** or **databases**; but this is typically only the case in scientific and technology-oriented publishing. Changes may also be minor for larger publishers who can afford outsourcing. Generating an electronic (digital) publication in parallel to a printed publication is then simply a matter of paying an external service provider, such as a document engineering company or a media design agency, to turn a Microsoft Word or Adobe InDesign **file** into an **ebook**. This process can be quick if the book is visually simple - such as a novel or a textbook with few illustrations - and economically worthwhile if many ebooks will be sold. 

*Change will be major for small, arts-oriented publishers* 

Since this Toolkit - consisting of this manual and an [online software kit](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/github/) - is meant for publishers who publish visually oriented books in mostly smaller print runs, we propose here an alternative to the process mentioned above. Neither a complex internal IT infrastructure, nor costly outsourcing will be viable solutions for these types of publishers. Unfortunately, there is no 'magic' **software** button that will turn a print book design into an electronic publication just like that. Since the two media are so different, each with its own specific editorial and visual design needs, such a button is unlikely to materialize in the future either. Hybrid publishing will ultimately require changes in the way the editorial work is done. The good news is that such change is possible. This Toolkit includes instructions on how to deal with the many issues that arise when making the transition from traditional to hybrid or electronic publishing. 

For art and design publishers, the challenge of 'going electronic' with their publications is greater than that faced by other fields of publishing, for a number of reasons: 

- Visually oriented publications are still more difficult to realize technically in the electronic medium, particularly when designing for a multitude of different reading **devices** and ebook **platforms**. 
- Small publishers are under a great deal of pressure to keep project costs low, often due to smaller budgets. However, the need to publish in multiple forms (print and electronic) will inevitably increase costs, unless one does as much work as possible in a way that is not dependent on the medium. 
- In order to make the investment in an electronic publication durable, electronic publications must be sustainable: they should not require constant investment in technical maintenance and version updates. 

##Industry promises vs. reality 

There is a stark contrast between the fanciful promises of the computer industry and the often harsh reality of the new digital medium. On one hand, publishers, editors, designers and artists tend to overestimate the **interactivity** and **multimedia** possibilities of electronic publishing. These extra possibilities do exist, but in most cases bring with them higher development costs and remain specific to one particular technical platform. 

On the other hand, publishers tend to underestimate how even technically simple and seemingly trivial types of electronic publications can in fact lead to a re-thinking of established publishing practices and formats. When traditional publishing formats are replaced by electronic or hybrid formats, there is a real possibility for transformation. Once the book becomes electronic or hybrid, the permanence, immutability and stability typical of physical books is likely to mutate into dynamic, modular, and participative forms. Such publications can greatly benefit from the networked environment in which ebooks exist. 

Various types of electronic publications may be subject to different kinds of change. Still, the change will always radical. An exhibition catalog for instance can be split up into interrelated micro-monographs which readers can download and read as individual ebooks. An ebook can be assembled from a variety of sources selected by individual readers, as is currently the case with Wikipedia, where visitors to the website can compile their own collection of Wikipedia articles and export this compilation to an **EPUB** or **PDF** document using the [Book Creator tool](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Help:Books). 

The possibilities for change can go beyond the rethinking of existing publishing formats, eventually even redefining what a book actually is. 


##What this Toolkit provides 

'Going electronic' - or going hybrid - requires changing the way you work during the publishing process, from delivered manuscript to final publication. The software tools currently in use, from **word processors** such as Microsoft Word to **desktop publishing (DTP)** suites such as Adobe InDesign, were created for the world of analog print and desktop publishing. Although it is entirely possible to create electronic publications from Microsoft Word documents [![Bloglink](images/dpt_blog_verwijzing.png)](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2014/03/28/converting-a-docx-directly-to-epub-using-calibre/ "Link to blog post: Converting a Docx directly to EPUB using Calibre") (*Converting a Docx directly to EPUB using Calibre*) or InDesign documents, [![Bloglink](images/dpt_blog_verwijzing.png)](http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/2013/05/21/epub-development-in-adobe-indesign-cs6/ "Link to blog post: NOTES ON EPUB DEVELOPMENT IN ADOBE INDESIGN CS6") (*Notes on EPUB Development in Adobe InDesign CS6*) which are likely to be the standard format used in existing publishing workflows, in most cases this will be a painful, slow, inefficient and expensive process. This Toolkit focuses instead on do-it-yourself (DIY) technical alternatives. Firstly because the Toolkit is primarily aimed at publishers who, in most cases, cannot afford to outsource ebook design to external service providers; secondly because it is aimed at those who wish to keep the design process in their own hands. 

This Toolkit focuses particularly (but not exclusively) on EPUB3 as an electronic publication format, and on **Markdown** as a word processing format, because of the specific needs of small-edition publishers in the field of art and design: low costs, ease of use, sustainability, and platform independence. The recommendations stem from our practical experience in collaborating on electronic publication projects with four Dutch art, design and research publishers: BIS Publishers, Valiz, nai010 Publishers and the Institute of Network Cultures. 


##Who is this Toolkit written for 

You may be a publisher, a designer, or someone who is just starting out with making books. You probably identify with, or work in, the arts. You may be hoping to find answers, gain knowledge, pick up some tips, and consult various resources. This Toolkit intends to provide all of that. The overall focus is on pragmatic solutions for publishers within the sector of art and culture. No prior knowledge of creating an ebook is required. Having said that, a familiarity with various computer software **applications** is certainly helpful, as is the willingness to learn, and an inquisitive curiosity to look beyond this guide for specific answers. This publication is not meant as a complete tutorial on how to create an electronic publication; rather, it intends to provide the reader with basic guidance on how to make a first attempt at creating such a publication. 

As we said at the beginning of this introduction, 'you must change your life'; therefore, you may experience something of a culture shock as you read through this document. If electronic publishing is to be merely an afterthought in the production chain and the product portfolio, the amount of change may be relatively small. However, if electronic publishing is to become just as important as print, the change may be quite radical. In other words, if you are seriously interested in electronic publishing, you must be willing to change your current way of working, and to gradually familiarize yourself with the less mainstream alternatives offered here. 


##How to use this Toolkit 

The Toolkit aims to provide a practical guide on how to develop electronic publications, for publishers as well as for anyone else interested in this subject matter. The Toolkit will attempt to provide insight into the prerequisite conditions of electronic publishing, to suggest **Open Source** tools whenever possible, and to allow publishers active in the art and culture sector to navigate the diverse and complex landscape of digital publishing in a more informed way. 

Furthermore, the Toolkit will help the reader to develop electronic publications - specifically art and design publications, which generally make use of a greater variety of fonts, graphics and **layout** than publications focused exclusively or mainly on text. 

After a basic exploration in Chapter 2 of publishing in general and electronic publishing in particular, in Chapter 3 we provide a general introduction to electronic publishing, sketching out various scenarios on how to develop electronic publications and discussing a number of issues and opportunities in 'going electronic'. In Chapter 4 we focus on the strengths and limitations of various specific types of **e-reader** hardware and software as well as different file formats, before moving on to describe in Chapter 5 a number of distribution platforms. In Chapter 6 we provide a step-by-step guide to creating your own EPUB. Chapter 7 offers a practical, how-to guide for workflows (both generally structured and specific to each scenario) and finally in Chapter 8 we explore the design of electronic publications for the various scenarios addressed earlier. Finally, in Chapter 9 we look into the future of electronic publishing. The manual also includes a description of the software developed within the different project groups, and a glossary of terms. 

We wish to stress here that the structure of the manual is not as linear as the above outline may suggest. Particularly further on in the manual, some of the terminology may seem confusing at first, but will be explained in more detail later. 

##Who worked on this Toolkit 

This publication is an outcome of the two-year research and development project *Digital Publishing Toolkit* funded by the Dutch Stichting Innovatie Alliantie (SIA) as part of its[^DPT-blog] RAAK-MKB[^RAAK-MKB] program for innovation in small and medium-sized businesses. The project was based on the following research question: *In what way can a platform be created with new tools for Open Source publishing that will allow publishers in the sector of art and culture to produce interactive e-publications themselves?* 

To answer this research question, the Institute of Network Cultures (lectoraat Netwerkcultuur) of the Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences, together with the Research Centre Creating 010 (kenniscentrum Creating 010) of the Rotterdam University of Applied Sciences jointly conducted state-of-the-practice-oriented design research. In collaboration with an already existing consortium[^DPT-Consortium] of eleven small businesses including publishers, designers and developers, four sub-projects were formulated. Within these sub-projects, a number of collaborations took place between publishers, designers, developers, researchers, and students of the participating universities of applied sciences. 

The result is the present publication, as well as a software repository consisting of tools for electronic publishing, based on Open Source software of which the source code is published and freely accessible.[^DPT-GitHub] With a single command line, one can get hold of the code repository, downloading not only the current state of 'source' files for the book, but also the full history of changes and comments made by each collaborator to the Toolkit up to that point. With another command, the various 'sources' can be pulled together into an instantly produced EPUB document. In this way both the 'content' and the 'machine' used for making the book are bundled and shared. 

We are not claiming that all ebooks will follow, or indeed should follow this path. We are simply laying out one of the many directions ebook creators can now take with their publications, by using simple and inexpensive tools, and without having to buy into the industry's glossy promises of multimedia and interactivity. 

[^DPT-blog]: *Blog of the Digital Publishing Toolkit research program*, <a href="http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing">http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing</a>. 
[^RAAK-MKB]: Nationaal Regieorgaan Praktijkgericht Onderzoek SIA, <a href="http://www.regieorgaan-sia.nl">http://www.regieorgaan-sia.nl</a>. 
[^DPT-GitHub]: Digital Publishing Toolkit GitHub, <a href="http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/github/">http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/github/</a>. 
[^DPT-Consortium]: Digital Publishing Toolkit consortium, <a href="http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/consortium/">http://networkcultures.org/digitalpublishing/consortium/</a>.
